and welcome to today's verified live we
start in Washington where Israel's prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu is preparing
to address the joint houses of Congress
in a few hours time amid protests over
his handling of the war in Gaza on his
first trip since the devastating attack
by Hamas on October the 7th Mr Netanyahu
has said that he'll be seeking to
consolidate bipartisan support for
Israel but several us lawmakers have
said they won't attend in a statement
the number two ranking Democrat in the
Senate Durban said I will stand by
Israel but I will not stand and cheer
its current prime minister we protest
against Mr netanyahu's visit started
last night hundreds of Jewish
demonstrators saging a sit in at the
capital to protest against the war in
Gaza those people were later removed by
police so let's go back live to Capitol
Hill live to Katrina Perry who is there
for us and uh we've seen more and more
protesters Gathering quite close to
where you are I know you're going to
talk to Tom bitman our correspondent
who's among them in a moment or two so
aside from all of that tell me a little
more about the raw politics of what
we're going to get a little later in
Congress well this is a very divisive
issue here in the US obviously President
Biden standing so strongly and so
squarely beside prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu over these past months since
those October 7th attacks but his
support is not universally welcomed not
even within his own party where there
isn't Unity somewhere between 30 and 50
Democratic lawmakers will boycott this
speech today you mentioned dick Durban
well the only Democrat that's senior to
him is Chuck Schumer he has said he will
be there but very many of his colleagues
won't many of them holding counter
events rallies and joining the protests
themselves um opposed to how prime
minister nanah who is handling this and
there are those who are protesting
because they want a stronger position in
terms of getting the hostages home and
those who are protesting because they
are want more done for the Palestinian
people in Gaza making the point to
President Biden that he will he should
tell prime minister netan Yahoo that the
war is against Hamas and not the
Palestinian
people a twin question here because
after the events of Sunday is there
likely to be much greater behind the
scenes pressure to get Benjamin
Netanyahu to sign up to that ceasefire
deal and a broader thought too because
right at the start October the 7th
America absolutely in lock step with
Israel there's been a subtle shift the
longer this war has gone on the way that
Israel has executed the war with
increasing concern just tell me about
both those
elements indeed well firstly President
Biden obviously not seeking reelection
that changes the calculation for him
personally and how he will now approach
his relationship with prime minister
Netanyahu who he will meet at the White
House tomorrow it now becomes even more
personal than it ever was for Joe Biden
he has a legacy that he needs to protect
now he has only a couple of months left
as president he doesn't want to be seen
as a lame duck president and this is
absolutely one of the goals that he
would like to deliver upon before he
leaves office in January a proud Zionist
he's spent so much of his career
standing close to Israel and particular
with prime minister Netanyahu but we
have seen that relationship change and
shift in recent months here in the
aftermath of October 7th President Biden
obviously traveling to Israel that
Embrace with Netanyahu there and I can
tell you here in the US there was almost
zero coverage of what was actually
happening in Gaza the ground swell of
support was very much towards Israel
that has shifted over the past months
and now there is a a growing and
significant public anger in this country
of what is happening in Gaza and the
death toll and the continuing horrific
humanitarian crisis so we're seeing
protesters here today who are coming for
a whole variety of reasons and we can
cross over now to my colleague
correspondent Tom baitman who is down
behind me somewhere here in the middle
of the protest Tom can you describe the
scene for us where you
are blood is on yeah I mean we got here
about half an hour ago and in that time
many many more protesters have arrived
speeches from the stage just getting
underway in the last 10 minutes one
speaker talking about tens of thousands
of people killed he said by Benjamin
Netanyahu what the protesters say they
want to do here is carry out they say a
citizens arrest against Benjamin
Netanyahu now clearly uh they're not
going to be able to get anywhere near
him if you look this way you can see uh
the Dome of the capital building in the
distance here I just took a walk up the
path here there are at this point you
know huge barricades dozens of police
they've tried to put effectively a ring
of Steel around the capital building uh
there was a van pulling up uh just as I
walked up there and boxes of cuffs those
plastic cuffs to Cuff people being
pulled out so already I think they're
anticipating the possibility or the
potential um for trouble here later but
at the moment as you can see things are
extremely calm and people peacefully
protesting um the organizers talked
about wanting to get tens of thousands
of people to come to Washington today
certainly buses were being laid on uh
from cities all over the East Coast so
the potential for a very very large
turnout as people try to make their
voices heard but crucially you know as
they get to the heart of American
democracy here their path is going to be
blocked as we get into the hours towards
Mr netanyahu's speech
and Tom talk to us a little bit about
the people who are already there what
are they saying to you about the reason
for coming here today to protest while
the prime minister is
speaking well overwhelmingly at this
protest and others you know they've had
recently that we've covered um people
talk about wanting to protest against
Israel's military offensive in Goda and
the scale of uh the uh numbers of
civilians killed by the Israeli
offensive uh fundamentally one of the
first reasons that's often quoted many
of the banners here are also about US
military aid for Israel that's an
absolutely fundamental issue not just in
the protest outside but of course
Katrina as you were mentioning the many
Democrats it seems that will boyot the
speech by Benjamin Netanyahu um the
Israel receiv received $3.8 billion
worth of US military assistance per year
historically cumulatively
recipient of American military aid
historically and that has been one of
the fundamental grievances particularly
among Democrats that they have tried to
push Joe Biden to change stack on to
change c um and there's only been that
one moment where a consignment of 2,000
bombs were held back um by the Americans
to the Israelis the administration said
at that point that that was over the
fact that they had such a huge imp
in densely built areas in Gaza now some
of that Consignment the 500b bombs were
since allowed to flow again but that key
point that relationship of military
assistance has not budged under Joe
Biden although he himself has talked
about indiscriminate bombing by the
Israelis in Gaza but he has very much
been frustrated ex exasperated by his
inability to cajo Benjamin Netanyahu to
switch course fundamentally over
humanarian crisis inaz
Li okay Tom thanks for that it is
obviously very loud where you are so
thanks for for bringing us that we will
speak to you a little later on prime
minister netanyahu's speech will take
place here behind me at the capital just
a couple of hours from now and he is
expected to use that speech to speak to
a number of audiences obviously the
domestic audience here in the US and the
lawmakers who ultimately have control
over various funding votes of support
Military Support to Israel but he's also
going to be addressing the domestic
audience back in Israel before he
boarded the plane to fly here earlier in
the week he himself was subject to many
protests in Israel it's the first time
he's left the country since those
October 7th attacks and there is a
ground swell of public feeling there um
against the what the prime minister is
doing to get those hostages back to
Israel who continue to be held by Hamas
in Gaza